Docs 6415 v3 duke (#1119)
mulesoft/docs-mule-runtime-3: modules/ROOT/pages/mule-app-dev.adoc

> = Mule Application Development

Reviewer: HERE

ifndef::env-site,env-github[]
include::_attributes.adoc[]
endif::[]
:page-aliases: mule-application-about.adoc, mule-app-strategies.adoc

You create Mule applications to perform system integrations. Typically, the
application reads data from internal and external sources, processes and
transforms data to the required formats or structures, and writes that
output to the systems and servers where you store or use the transformed data.

> Mule applications are configured to run in the Mule runtime engine. A request

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Mule applications are configured to run in Mule runtime engine (Mule). A request
```

to a Mule application triggers Mule to encode the request and data in a Mule
event and to pass it to either single or multiple threads.

> == Getting Started

Reviewer: How about...:
```suggestion
== Getting Started with Mule Application Development
```

To get started with Mule application development, you can follow the steps
in these tutorials:

> 

Reviewer: I suggest breaking the following list items into one line for the link and one for the description. 
Recommended style for list items is one fragment or sentence max, to ease scannability.

> * xref:mule-app-dev-hellomule.adoc[Hello Mule Tutorial]:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* xref:mule-app-dev-hellomule.adoc[Hello Mule Tutorial]

```

Build a Mule application that interacts with a user in a simple HTTP
request-response flow.

> * xref:mule-app-tutorial.adoc[Mule Application Development Tutorial]:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* xref:mule-app-tutorial.adoc[Mule Application Development Tutorial]

```

Build a Mule application that retrieves data from a database and transforms the
to a new structure.

> == Building Blocks of a Mule Application

Reviewer: "building block" is idiomatic, but it is also super common, so...I don't feel strongly about using it one way or another. An alternative is "component" or "element." Up to you!  :-)

Mule applications use connectors, modules, and components to read, write,
and process data.

> 

Reviewer: DITTO prev. comment about format of list items

> * xref:connectors::index.adoc[Connectors and Modules]: Anypoint connectors

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* xref:connectors::index.adoc[Connectors and Modules]
Anypoint Connectors
```

provide components, such as listeners, that interact with external API
endpoints and act on data in the Mule application. Modules, such as

> the Validation, Java, Spring, and OAuth, provide modules that act on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the Validation module, Java module, Spring module, and OAuth module, act on
```

data in a Mule application without providing a direct connection to an endpoint.
+

> * xref:about-components.adoc[Core Components]: Core components support

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* xref:about-components.adoc[Core Components]
Core components support
```

flow control, error handling, logging, batch, and other programmatic
operations on data that flows through your application.

> == DataWeave

Reviewer: DataWeave Language?

DataWeave is the primary language used for formulating expressions in Mule.
Connectors, modules, and components support the use of DataWeave to access,

> manipulate and transform data structures and output formats, and extract data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
manipulate, and transform data structures and output formats, and to extract data
```

that is processed within the Mule application.

At runtime, Mule evaluates DataWeave expressions while executing a flow to:

> 

Reviewer: no periods; not sentences

> * Extract data needed to process the current message.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Extract data needed to process the current message
```

> * Set or manipulate a value in the message.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Set or manipulate a value in the message
```

[[flows]]

> === Mule Flows

Reviewer: Is this topic really supposed to be a subtopic to "DataWeave Language"?

Understanding basic flow architecture is key to understanding a Mule application.
Essentially, every Mule flow contains a series of Mule components that receive or

> process messages.

Reviewer: Use a colon to point directly to an image or example or list that follows a sentence:
```suggestion
process messages:
```

.Simple Flow in Design Center
image::flow-example.png[Simple Flow in Design Center]

At the simplest level, flows are sequences of processors. A message
that enters a flow can pass through a variety of processors. In a typical
flow, a Mule application receives a message through a source (such as an

> HTTP listener), transforms that message into a new format, and processes

Reviewer: listener, but HTTP Listener? I have tried to research this usage and get conflicting results. What do you think? Would you please Slack me an answer?

any business logic before writing the processed message to an external
system in a format that the system can read.

> To break up processing into more manageable units, Mule applications often contain

Reviewer: "break up" can be difficult to translate, so I typically suggest using "break" alone or finding another single term, like "divide" or "separate" or similar.

> multiple, interrelated flows, instead of just a single flow. A flow can call

Reviewer: ```suggestion
multiple, interrelated flows instead of just a single flow. One flow can call
```

another flow as a direct reference.

> For more on this topic, see xref:about-flows.adoc[Flows and Subflows] and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information about this topic, see xref:about-flows.adoc[Flows and Subflows] and
```

xref:mule-components-overview.adoc[Mule Components].

> 

Reviewer: ditto question about topic subordination; GLOBAL

> === Sources

Reviewer: "Source Components"?
"Triggers"?

> 

Reviewer: Are "Mule event" and "Mule event object" the same thing?
If so, can we pick the best term and use only it?

Author: Mule event chosen

A source component (or trigger) is the first component in a flow. It
receives a triggering event, creates a corresponding Mule event object,

> and forwards that event on for processing by the next component in the flow.

Reviewer: "forwards on" is redundant. How about:
```suggestion
and forwards that event for processing by the next component in the flow.
```
OR
```suggestion
and forwards that event to be processed by the next component in the flow.
```

> External clients can trigger processing in a Mule flow through a number of

Reviewer: "a number of" can be difficult to translate. How about:
```suggestion
External clients can trigger processing in a Mule flow through several
```

communication protocols and methods, such as JMS, HTTP, FTP, JDBC, or File.
Mule translates these communication protocols and methods into a standard
message format, which passes through the flow's processors.

Sources in Mule can connect to specific external sources, either through
a standard protocol or a third-party API. It is also possible to set a Scheduler
component. Some schedulers can poll for specific changes to external resources,
such as new files or table rows in an external resource. Examples of listeners
and connector operations that can trigger a flow include:

> * HTTP, JMS, VM listeners in their associated connectors

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* HTTP, JMS, and VM listeners in their associated connectors
```

* On Table Row operation in the Database connector
* On New or Updated File operation in the File and FTP connectors
* Scheduler

Note that you can also create your own source using the
xref:mule-sdk::index.adoc[Mule SDK].

=== Processors

> Once a flow is triggered through a source component, subsequent components process

Reviewer: once > after, if that is what you mean
Otherwise, can be initially read as "occurring one time"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After a flow is triggered through the source component, subsequent components process
```

the data as it travels through the flow. By default, each processor
that receives a Mule event returns a new Mule message, typically with a set
of attributes and the message payload that the processor returns. The processor

> passes on the new message as output to the next processor in the flow.

Reviewer: passes on > forwards (translation)
```suggestion
forwards the new message as output to the next processor in the flow.
```

Processors available to Mule applications include:

> 

Reviewer: ditto re. list formatting

Reviewer: Also...does this list have just two items: components from modules and connectors, and core components?
We could just name the two here, and then devote plain text to each in following paragraphs.
Reading this in the AsciiDoc code, I thought that maybe transformers and target parameters were supposed to be list items parallel to "components from..." and "core components."

> * Components from modules and connectors. Examples include operations that read

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Components from modules and connectors
Examples include operations that read
```

from and write to an external resource and that validate data in the Mule application.
+
Some operations can make client requests to external resources and services
(including external databases and systems, such as Salesforce, Workday,
ServiceNow, and many others) and to other Mule applications. Others can run your

> custom code, support OAuth configurations, and handle communication through

Reviewer: "handle" is also hard to translate, and kind of vague. I typically suggest "manage," but it depends on context:
```suggestion
custom code, support OAuth configurations, and manage communication through
```

> asynchronous queues, for example. A variety of other operations are

Reviewer: To avoid verb agreement questions...:
```suggestion
asynchronous queues, for example. Many other operations are
```

available.

> +

Reviewer: Note that the second list item is not parallel with the first, which begins with a fragment only.
GLOBALLY try to make the list items parallel: all fragments or all sentences.

Author: fixed

* Core components can route data, perform data transformations, handle errors
that might occur when processing the event, and perform other tasks in a
Mule application.
+
Transformers (such as the Transform Message, Set Variable, and others) are
key to exchanging data between nodes. Transformers enable Mule to convert
message data in the Mule event to a format that another application or service can
read.
+
Mule also enables content enrichment of messages (through

> xref:target-variables.adoc[Target Parameters]) so that you can retrieve

Reviewer: ```suggestion
xref:target-variables.adoc[target parameters]) so that you can retrieve
```

additional data and attach it to the message.

> Note that you can also create your own Event processors using the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that you can also create your own event processors using the
```

xref:mule-sdk::index.adoc[Mule SDK].

== Security

You can provide security to your Mule applications by encrypting properties, configuring
secure communications over TLS, setting up authentication over OAuth 2.0, and
providing cryptographic and other capabilities, such as FIPS compliance.

> * xref:securing.adoc[Security]

Reviewer: This should be a sentence rather than a single list item: "For more information about...".

== Development Environments

You can develop a Mule application using
xref:docs-studio::index.adoc[Anypoint Studio] (an Eclipse-based IDE),
xref:docs-design-center::about-designing-a-mule-application.adoc[Flow Designer]

> (a Cloud-based application in Design Center, on Anypoint Platform),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(a cloud-based application in Design Center, on Anypoint Platform),
```

or, if you are an advanced developer, in your own IDE.

For example, in Studio, you build and design a Mule application in a project

> that contains one or more an XML-based files. A Mule project supports all the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that contains one or more XML-based files. A Mule project supports all the
```

dependencies required for development. The

> xref:7.3@docs-studio::index.adoc#package-explorer[Package Explorer] in Studio

Reviewer: ```suggestion
xref:7.3@docs-studio::index.adoc#package-explorer[Package Explorer] view in Studio
```

provides access to the project folders and files that make up a Mule project

> support a design-time environment in which you can also build, run, and test

Reviewer: There's some text missing or added here; fix.

Reviewer: Side note: "make up" is another one of those terms that nonnatives to English don't quite get. If you can use one specific term, like "compose," instead, so much the better.

> your Mule application. Flow Designer supports a Cloud-based version of a Mule project.

Reviewer: GLOBALLY change "Cloud-based" to "cloud-based." 
We now lowercase "cloud" in the same way that we have come to lowercase "internet."

[[version]]
== Mule Versioning

The Mule version you use determines what your Mule application, domain, or policy can
do and what features and products are compatible with Mule.  For example,

> xref:about-components.adoc[Core components], which process the Mule event

Reviewer: ```suggestion
xref:about-components.adoc[core components], which process a Mule event
```

Author: Core is part of the Core module.

as it travels through flows in a Mule application, are part of a Core module that is
bundled with and shares the same version as Mule.
xref:connectors::index.adoc[Modules, connectors], the DataWeave language, and

> a number of MuleSoft products have their own versioning system but are

Reviewer: GLOBALLY replace "a number of" with something like "several" or "many" or "a few," depending on your context and intent.

compatible with specific versions of Mule. For example, DataWeave 2.0 and

> Studio 7.x are compatible Mule 4.x runtimes, while DataWeave 1.0 and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Studio 7.x are compatible Mule 4.x, while DataWeave 1.0 and
```

> Studio 6.x are compatible with Mule 3.x runtimes. You need to make sure the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Studio 6.x are compatible with Mule 3.x. Verify that the
```
